Heracles

By Euripides

Written 421-416 B.C.E

Translated by E. P. Coleridge

Dramatis Personae

AMPHITRYON, husband of Alcmena, the mother of HERACLES
MEGARA, wife of HERACLES, daughter of Creon
LYCUS, unlawful King of Thebes
IRIS
MADNESS
MESSENGER
HERACLES, son of Zeus and Alcmena
THESEUS, King of Athens
CHORUS OF OLD MEN OF THEBES

Scene 

Before the palace of HERACLES at Thebes. Nearby stands the altar of
Zeus, on the steps of which are now seated AMPHITRYON, MEGARA and 
her sons by HERACLES. They are seeking refuge at the altar.

AMPHITRYON

What mortal hath not heard of him who shared a wife with Zeus,
Amphitryon of Argos, whom on a day Alcaeus, son of Perseus begat,
Amphitryon the father of Heracles? He it was dwelt here in Thebes,
where from the sowing of the dragon’s teeth grew up a crop of
earth-born giants; for of these Ares saved a scanty band, and their
children’s children people the city of Cadmus. Hence sprung Creon, son
of Menoeceus, king of this land; and Creon became the father of this
lady Megara, whom once all Cadmus’ race escorted with the glad music
of lutes at her wedding, in the day that Heracles, illustrious chief,
led her to my halls. Now he, my son, left Thebes where I was settled,
left his wife Megara and her kin, eager to make his home in Argolis,
in that walled town which the Cyclopes built, whence I am exiled for
the slaying of Electryon; so he, wishing to lighten my affliction and
to find a home in his own land, did offer Eurystheus a mighty price
for my recall, even to free the world of savage monsters, whether it
was that Hera goaded him to submit to this, or that fate was leagued
against him. Divers are the toils he hath accomplished, and last of
all hath he passed through the mouth of Taenarus into the halls of
Hades to drag to the light that hound with bodies three, and thence is
he never returned. Now there is an ancient legend amongst the race of
Cadmus, that one Lycus in days gone by was husband to Dirce being king
of this city with its seven towers, before that Amphion and Zethus,
sons of Zeus, lords of the milk-white steeds, became rulers in the
land. His son, called by the same name as his father, albeit no Theban
but a stranger from Euboea, slew Creon, and after that seized the
government, having fallen on this city when weakened by dissension. So
this connection with Creon is likely to prove to us a serious evil;
for now that my son is in the bowels of the earth, this illustrious
monarch Lycus is bent on extirpating the children of Heracles, to
quench one bloody feud with another, likewise his wife and me, if
useless age like mine is to rank amongst men, that the boys may never
grow up to exact a blood-penalty of their uncle’s family. So I, left
here by my son, whilst he is gone into the pitchy darkness of the
earth, to tend and guard his children in his house, am taking my place
with their mother, that the race of Heracles may not perish, here at
the altar of Zeus the Saviour, which my own gallant child set up to
commemorate his glorious victory over the Minyae. And here we are
careful to keep our station, though in need of everything, of food, of
drink, and raiment, huddled together on the hard bare ground; for we
are barred out from our house and sit here for want of any other
safety. As for friends, some I see are insincere; while others, who
are staunch, have no power to help us further. This is what misfortune
means to man; God grant it may never fall to the lot of any who bears
the least goodwill to me, to apply this never-failing test of
friendship!

MEGARA

Old warrior, who erst did raze the citadel of the Taphians leading on
the troops of Thebes to glory, how uncertain are God’s dealings with
man! For I, as far as concerned my sire was never an outcast of
fortune, for he was once accounted a man of might by reason of his
wealth, possessed as he was of royal power, for which long spears are
launched at the lives of the fortunate through love of it; children
too he had; and me did he betroth to thy son, matching me in glorious
marriage with Heracles. Whereas now all that is dead and gone from us;
and I and thou, old friend, art doomed to die, and these children of
Heracles, whom I am guarding ’neath my wing as a bird keepeth her
tender chicks under her. And they the while in turn keep asking me,
"Mother, whither is our father gone from the land? what is he about?
when will he return?" Thus they inquire for their father, in childish
perplexity; while I put them off with excuses, inventing stories; but
still I wonder if ’tis he whenever a door creaks on its hinges, and up
they all start, thinking to embrace their father’s knees. What hope or
way of salvation art thou now devising, old friend? for to thee I
look. We can never steal beyond the boundaries of the land unseen, for
there is too strict a watch set on us at every outlet, nor have we any
longer hopes of safety in our friends. Whatever thy scheme is, declare
it, lest our death be made ready, while we are only prolonging the
time, powerless to escape. 

AMPHITRYON

’Tis by no means easy, my daughter, to give one’s earnest advice
on such matters easily, without weary thought. 

MEGARA

Dost need a further taste of grief, or cling so fast to life? 

AMPHITRYON

Yes, I love this life, and cling to its hopes. 

MEGARA

So do I; but it boots not to expect the unexpected, old friend. 


AMPHITRYON

In these delays is left the only cure for our evils. 


MEGARA

’Tis the pain of that interval I feel so. 


AMPHITRYON

Daughter, there may yet be a happy escape from present troubles for me
and thee; my son, thy husband, may yet arrive. So calm thyself, and
wipe those tears from thy children’s eyes, and soothe them with soft
words, inventing a tale to delude them, piteous though such fraud
be. Yea, for men’s misfortunes ofttimes flag, and the stormy wind doth
not always blow so strong, nor are the prosperous ever so; for all
things change, making way for each other. The bravest man is he who
relieth ever on his hopes, but despair is the mark of a coward. 

The CHORUS OF OLD MEN OF THEBES enters.

…
