First World War Poets

ROBERT GRAVES (1895 — 1985)
An  English poet, novelist, critic and classicist. 
At the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914,
Graves enlisted almost immediately, taking a commission
in the Royal Welch Fusiliers. He published his first
volume of poems, Over the Brazier, in 1916. 


The Last Post
by Robert Graves

The bugler sent a call of high romance—
“Lights out! Lights out!” to the deserted square.
On the thin brazen notes he threw a prayer,
“God, if it’s this for me next time in France…
O spare the phantom bugle as I lie
Dead in the gas and smoke and roar of guns,
Dead in a row with the other broken ones
Lying so stiff and still under the sky,
Jolly young Fusiliers too good to die.”


RUPERT BROOKE (1887 — 1915)
After hesitation about what course of action to take at
the start of the First World War he joined the navy. He was a
witness at the siege of Antwerp before writing his famous set
of five sonnets called 1914. Though he had seen the devastation
and suffering created by the war he kept it all at an emotional
distance from himself, denying the realities of war.

Following a mosquito bite he died of acute blood poisoning on
board ship on his way to Gallipoli, and was buried on the
Greek Island of Skyros.

Peace
by Rupert Brooke
(the first of his sonnets in the 1914 sequence)

Now, God be thanked Who has matched us with His hour,  
And caught our youth, and wakened us from sleeping,  
With hand made sure, clear eye, and sharpened power,  
To turn, as swimmers into cleanness leaping,  
Glad from a world grown old and cold and weary,  
Leave the sick hearts that honour could not move,  
And half-men, and their dirty songs and dreary,  
And all the little emptiness of love!

Oh! we, who have known shame, we have found release there, 
Where there's no ill, no grief, but sleep has mending, 
Naught broken save this body, lost but breath;  
Nothing to shake the laughing heart's long peace there  
But only agony, and that has ending;  
And the worst friend and enemy is but Death.

VERA BRITTAIN (1893 — 1970)
She felt compelled to play a part, and worked as a VAD
nurse in England, France and Malta. She was moved to the
verge of a nervous breakdown by her experiences in the
war and the loss of a close friend, her fiancé, and brother.


To My Brother (In Memory Of July 1st, 1916)
Vera Brittain

Your battle-wounds are scars upon my heart, 
Received when in that grand and tragic ‘show’ 
You played your part, 
Two years ago, 

And silver in the summer morning sun 
I see the symbol of your courage glow —
That Cross you won 
Two years ago. 

Though now again you watch the shrapnel fly, 
And hear the guns that daily louder grow, 
As in July 
Two years ago. 

May you endure to lead the Last Advance 
And with your men pursue the flying foe 
As once in France 
Two years ago. 
