The Long Ships
(A Saga of the Viking Age)
Frans G. Bengtsson


Prologue

How the shaven men fared in Skania
in King Harald Bluetooth’s time

Many restless men rowed north from Skania[1] with Bue and Vagn[2], and found
ill fortune at Jörundfjord[3]; others marched with Styrbjörn[4] to Uppsala
and died there with him. When the news reached their homeland that few
of them could be expected to return, elegies were declamed and
memorial stones set up; whereupon, all sensible men agreed that what
had happened was for the best, since they could now hope to have a
more peaceful time than before, and less parcelling out of land by the
axe and sword. There followed a time of plenty, with fine rye harvests
and great herring catches, so that most people were well contented;
but there were some who thought that the crops were tardy, and they
went a-viking in Ireland and England, where fortune smiled on their
wars; and many of them stayed there.

About this time the shaven men had begun to arrive in Skania, both
from the Saxons’ land and from England, to preach the Christian
faith. They had many strange tales to relate, and at first people were
curious and listened to them eagerly, and women found it pleasant to
be baptized by these foreigners and to be presented with a white
shift. Before long, however, the foreigners began to run short of
shifts, and people wearied of their sermons, finding them tedious and
their matter doubtful; besides which, they spoke a rough-sounding
dialect that they had learned in Hedeby or in the western islands,
which gave their speech a foolish air.

So then there was something of a decline in conversions, and the
shaven men, who talked incessantly of peace and were above all very
violent in their denunciation of the gods, were one by one seized by
devout persons and were hung up on sacred ash trees and shot at with
arrows, and offered to the birds of Odin. Others went northwards to
the forests of the Göings, where men were less religiously inclined;
there they were welcomed warmly, and were tied up and led to the
markets in Smaland, where they were bartered for oxen and for beaver
skins. Some of them, upon finding themselves slaves of the Smalanders,
let their hair grow and waxed discontented with their God Jehovah and
gave good service to their masters; but the majority continued to
denounce the gods and to spend their time baptizing women and children
instead of breaking stones and grinding corn, and made such a nuisance
of themselves that soon it became impossible for the Göings to obtain,
as hitherto, a yoke of three-year-old oxen for a sturdy priest without
giving a measure of salt or cloth into the bargain. So feeling
increased against the shaven men in the border country.


[1] A southern provence of Sweden, but in the year 989AD the area
belonged to Denmark.

[2]  Bue Digre and Vagn Åkesson, Skanian chieftains that sailed with
the Jómsvíkings and their Chieftain Sigvalde when he sailed to Norway
to kill the rebel Jarl Haakon

[3] The battle of Jörundfjord, one of the most famous battles fought
in the north during the Viking Age.

[4] Styrbjörn, the exiled nephew of King Erik of Sweden. He sought to
win his uncle's kingdom, but was killed by a chance spear in the first
moments of the fight.
